---
layout: post
title: "Va Va Vim!!"
date: 2020-06-10
tags: programming coding
---
# Va Va [ VIM! ](http://www.vim.org)

Way back in the distant past, no, further back than that, my working days were spent hammering away in the mysterious and arcane editor [ vi ](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vi). In my memory, hazy though it is, these were my most productive coding days, I just seemed to crank out so much stuff. There is a caveat to this, my roles in the early days were 100% coding focused, and there were no distractions, literally, none. Well, ok, you could get up and make a cup of tea (_even coffee hadn't been invented yet_). But there were no agile ceremonies, no interweb to browse, no new technologies to learn (technology was a strictly enforced monoculture in each company or team). **But there is no doubt `vi` contributed to my productivity.**

Recently, as a result of having some time on my hands (_furlough_) and some stiffness in my shoulder (_mouse induced RSI_) I decided to revisit my old friend `vi`. For those totally unfamiliar with `vi`, the _RSI_ aspect is relevant because `vi` was designed with no dependency on a mouse, there weren't any.

## Things I learned...

* `vi` is now called `vim`, or rather `vi` is now superseded by an entirely separate tool called `vim`, which stands for `vi` **im**proved.
* Muscle memory is long lasting. Indeed I have been religiously hitting `<esc>` after typing code my entire career, much to the confusion of every version of Visual Studio, IntelliJ, Eclipse etc that I've used over the years.
* Muscle memory takes a while to acquire. I have spent a LOT of time Googling for _how do I do x in vim_. You can do everything in `vim` without leaving the safety of your keyboard, but you won't remember it all, muscle or not, for a while.
* There is an excellent `vim` [ extension for VS Code ](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=vscodevim.vim).
* VS Code and `vim` work really well together, for example there is good integration with `multi-cursors` which is a real time-saver.
* There is an outstanding [ tutorial ](https://www.barbarianmeetscoding.com/blog/2019/02/08/boost-your-coding-fu-with-vscode-and-vim) written by Jaime González García that walks through installing and using `vim` in VS Code.
* My shoulder is much better.


## Things I recommend...

* Watch a `vim` overview/tutorial. You won't (and don't need to) remember all the commands, but it helps to have a high level overview of the modes and the type of things `vim` is capable of.
* Spend some time in `vim`, grab a code file that you have no emotional attachment to and just start hacking. Try to replicate the common actions of coding in that language using `vim` commands. There is a steep initial learning curve, so be patient and give this a little bit of time.
* If you decide that you'd like to explore `vim` further:
    * Install a `vim` extension in your IDE of choice. This gives you the speed and precision of `vim`, with the benefits of the IDE, ie auto-complete, intellisense, snippets et al. If you really don't get on with it, uninstall it again. Nothing lost.
    * Build your own `cheat sheet`, you can focus it on the commands you use most often, and building it will help to acquire muscle memory.
    * Put your mouse on eBay.
